<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="id309017d9-9fd7-4a34-b13a-4bf8ecea4556">
   <title>Namespaces</title>
   <body>
      <p>When you want to process XML instances from different sources with XSLT, you will
inevitably have to deal with the topic of namespaces<indexterm>XML Constructs<indexterm>Namespaces</indexterm>
         </indexterm> to avoid conflicts in 
the element selectors.<fn callout="I"><p>UWE test footnote (9/40, callout I): DITA fn maps to UWE footnote/key/desc.</p></fn></p>
      <p>Especially with chained transformations, it can also happen 
that a namespace is unexpectedly generated in the output
that the following processing step does not understand because it was not declared there.</p>
      <p>There are several ways to declare a namespace in the stylesheet. Assuming
that exactly one source and at most one configuration file is processed 
in a transformation step, the stylesheet element could look like this:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:stylesheet version="2.0" 
  xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
  xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
  xmlns:tektur="https://namespace-eigener-xslt-funktionen"
  xmlns="http://namespace-in-der-xml-eingabe.com/"
  xpath-default-namespace="https://namespace-der-konfigdatei.com/"
  exclude-result-prefixes="#all"&gt;</pre>
      <ul>
         <li>
            <p>The <codeph>xsl</codeph>namespace is of course the namespace for the XSLT instructions and must be declared.</p>
         </li>
         <li>
            <p>The <codeph>xs</codeph>namespace is necessary if you want to work with typed values. It allows the inclusion of data types
according to the XML Schema specification <xref format="html" scope="external" href="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_Schema">XML Schema</xref> and thus 
better validation of the stylesheet at compile time.</p>
         </li>
         <li>
            <p>The declaration of a custom prefixed namespace allows the inclusion of custom XSLT functions, 
such as the inclusion of the FunctX library <xref format="html" scope="external" href="http://www.xsltfunctions.com/">FunctX</xref>
            </p>
         </li>
         <li>
            <p>The unprefixed namespace is the <b>default namespace</b> and can handle a namespace from the input</p>
         </li>
         <li>
            <p>The <b>xpath-default-namespace</b> attribute specifies another namespace that can be used in XPath functions.
In this field I would specify the namespace of a configuration or separate data file.</p>
         </li>
      </ul>
      <p>In my view, more than one namespace in the input should be avoided in XML processing with XSLT - if possible.
If necessary, it is advisable to normalize the input before processing and rename elements if needed. Otherwise, you can also declare custom namespace prefixes, such as:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">xmlns:ext="https://www.tekturcms.de/external-tools"</pre>
      <p>and use them in XPath selections and match rules.</p>
      <hazardstatement type="warning" status="changed">
         <messagepanel>
            <typeofhazard>If the input data contains namespaces that are not handled in the XSLT stylesheets - the namespace may only be attached
to one very specific element - it can lead to unexpected results during the transformation - without an error message.</typeofhazard>
            <howtoavoid>Therefore, the data should be analyzed very carefully regarding namespaces beforehand.</howtoavoid>
         </messagepanel>
      </hazardstatement>
      <p>Namespaces in the input are therefore usually handled via the header declaration in the stylesheet file. Which namespace
is ultimately written to the output depends on the currently processed context node:</p>
      <ul>
         <li>
            <p>Elements that you create automatically receive the default namespace (unless you explicitly specify a namespace).</p>
         </li>
         <li>
            <p>Elements that you copy carry the namespace they had in the input (unless you explicitly prevent this).</p>
         </li>
      </ul>
      <p>There are several ways to control (or override) these two default behaviors:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:element name="{local-name()}" namespace="{namespace-uri()}"&gt;</pre>
      <p>Here, an element is declared with the unprefixed namespace of the context node.
If the context node does not have a different namespace, this ensures
that the default namespace actually appears in the output.</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:element name="meinelement" namespace="mein-namespace"&gt;</pre>
      <p>Here, an element with a custom namespace specification is written to the output. More simply written:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;mein-element xmlns="mein-namespace"&gt;</pre>
      <p>There is also an attribute on the <codeph>xsl:copy</codeph> element
that can control the namespace copying process:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:template match="p"&gt;
  &lt;xsl:copy copy-namespaces="no"&gt;
     &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
   &lt;/xsl:copy&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
      <p>Here, the namespace on the <codeph>p</codeph> element is not written to the output.</p>
      <p>Likewise, a default copy rule can be used that prohibits inheriting a namespace:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:template match="@* | node()"&gt;
   &lt;xsl:copy inherit-namespaces="no"&gt;
     &lt;xsl:apply-templates select="@* | node()"/&gt;
   &lt;/xsl:copy&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
      <section>
         <title>In the Wild</title>
         <p>In the wild, I recently stumbled upon the following problem:</p>
         <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
                xpath-default-namespace="https://tekturcms.de/schema/x12-xml/1.0"
                exclude-result-prefixes="#all"
                version="3.0"&gt;

  &lt;xsl:template match="my-element"&gt;
    &lt;neuer-name&gt;
      &lt;xsl:apply-templates&gt;
    &lt;/neuer-name&gt;
  &lt;/xsl:template&gt;

  [...]</pre>
         <hazardstatement type="notice" status="changed">
            <messagepanel>
               <typeofhazard>Declared this way, the new element [[code:my-element]] would be placed in the output with an empty namespace, like [[code:&lt;neuer-name xmlns=""/&gt;]]. A subsequent transformation step cannot read this.</typeofhazard>
               <howtoavoid>For this reason, I always place new elements in the output using the element constructor.</howtoavoid>
            </messagepanel>
         </hazardstatement>
         <p>Example:</p>
         <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:template match="my-element"&gt;
    &lt;xsl:element name="neuer-name" namespace="{namespace-uri()}"&gt;
      &lt;xsl:apply-templates&gt;
    &lt;/xsl:element&gt;
  &lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
      </section>
      <section>
         <title>Namespaces in XQuery</title>
         <p>While XSLT should serve to transform XML data into other (XML) formats, XQuery 
serves, for example, to select data from different sources on a <b>NoSQL</b> database,
harmonize them, and pass them on to processing workflows.</p> |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .       <p>That is why it is not so surprising to me that the namespace concept in XQuery somehow works
better.</p>
         <p>In order to be able to select data from an XML document with namespaces at all,
all namespaces must be specified at the beginning of the XQuery expression. This looks like this:</p> |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .       <pre xml:space="preserve">xquery version "1.0-ml";

import module namespace tektur = "http://www.teturcms.de/xquery/common" 
                                  at "common.xqy";
import module namespace mem = "http://xqdev.com/in-mem-update" 
                                  at '/MarkLogic/appservices/utils/in-mem-update.xqy';
declare namespace local = "https://tekturcms.de/code/alex-sandbox/1.0";
declare namespace weiredns = "https://weired-ns-in-input-data.com/weired/ns";
declare namespace xs = "http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"; </pre>
         <p>Here, functions from other modules are first included. Those in a separate file <codeph>common.xqy</codeph>, as well as from the <codeph>mem</codeph> library in the<b> MarkLogic</b>
environment. Then a namespace <codeph>local</codeph> is declared for custom functions within the source file, as well as the namespace <codeph>weiredns</codeph>, which is present in the input data. The namespace<codeph>xs</codeph> is set analogously to the XSLT example.</p> |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |  |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .           |   |                                                    Rejected by , .       </section>
   </body>
</topic>
