<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="id51877293-95b9-4486-b8f6-c006615a8109">
   <title>XSLT Accumulator</title>
   <body>
      <p>A simple streaming stylesheet could look like this, for example:<fn callout="V"><p>UWE test footnote (22/40, callout V): DITA fn maps to UWE footnote/key/desc.</p></fn></p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform" xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" version="3.0" exclude-result-prefixes="#all"&gt;
   &lt;xsl:output method="xml" indent="yes"/&gt;
   &lt;xsl:mode on-no-match="shallow-copy" use-accumulators="entry-count" streamable="true"/&gt;
   &lt;xsl:accumulator name="entry-count" as="xs:integer" initial-value="0" streamable="yes"&gt;
      &lt;xsl:accumulator-rule match="entry" select="$value + 1"/&gt;
   &lt;/xsl:accumulator&gt;
   &lt;xsl:template match="/"&gt;
      &lt;result&gt;
         &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
         &lt;count&gt;
            &lt;xsl:value-of select="accumulator-after('entry-count')"/&gt;
         &lt;/count&gt;
      &lt;/result&gt;
   &lt;/xsl:template&gt;
&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;</pre>
      <p>This stylesheet has some noteworthy features:</p>
      <p>First, a default mode is declared that copies every node of the input instance to the output instance via
an implicit identity transformation (shallow-copy) <xref format="html" scope="external" href="https://www.saxonica.com/html/documentation/xsl-elements/mode.html">Mode options in XSLT3.0</xref>
         <indexterm>Processing Methods<indexterm>Shallow Copy</indexterm>
         </indexterm>.</p>
      <p>(The conventional way would be to use a template like this:)</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:template match="node()|@*"
  &lt;xsl:copy&gt;
    &lt;xsl:apply-templates select="node()|@*"/&gt;
  &lt;/xsl:copy&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
      <p>Additionally, an accumulator<indexterm>Processing Methods<indexterm>Accumulator</indexterm>
         </indexterm> is used. </p>
      <hazardstatement type="caution" status="changed">
         <messagepanel>
            <typeofhazard>Normally, there are no variables in XSLT, only constants, as is also the case with functional programming languages.</typeofhazard>
            <howtoavoid>There has been a Saxon extension for some time that allowed multiple assignments of a value to a variable. In normal circumstances, however, this capability is not needed.</howtoavoid>
         </messagepanel>
      </hazardstatement>
      <p>When processing very large data sets, however, assignable variables are indispensable, because otherwise
the runtime stack would quickly reach its limits.</p>
      <p>An accumulator accumulates values. These can be atomic types,
as in the example above, but data structures can also be built up, such as 
the currently processed subtree in a dictionary.</p>
      <p>The accumulator must have the <codeph>streamable="yes"</codeph> property set if it is to
work in streaming mode. In this mode, the accumulator value can only be read
once the examined tree has been fully traversed.</p>
      <p>To identify the differences from "normal" XSLT operation, some changes can be made in the above example 
that the streaming processor will not accept. Saxon responds to this supposedly erroneous input with the following error message:</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">Cannot call accumulator-after except during the post-descent 
phase of a streaming template</pre>
      <hazardstatement type="notice" status="changed">
         <messagepanel>
            <typeofhazard>This error message appears when you remove the [[code:apply-templates]] call. The accumulator is only filled when the tree has also been explicitly traversed.</typeofhazard>
            <howtoavoid/>
         </messagepanel>
      </hazardstatement>
      <p>This traversal can also be a pure copy, for example, the <codeph>apply-templates</codeph> call can also be replaced by a... </p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">&lt;xsl:copy-of select="."/&gt;</pre>
      <p>... which would be equivalent to the mode setting</p>
      <pre xml:space="preserve">on-no-match="deep-copy"</pre>
      <p>As you can see, much has changed in XSLT 3.0 regarding the handling of different
processing modes. Instead of writing default match rules, you set specific mode properties in the stylesheet declaration that realize the tree traversal in different ways.</p>
      <hazardstatement type="caution" status="changed">
         <messagepanel>
            <typeofhazard>Processing large data sets with streaming is, however, somewhat tricky!</typeofhazard>
            <howtoavoid>It should always be checked whether a possibly conventional performance-optimized XSLT is sufficient for the use case.</howtoavoid>
         </messagepanel>
      </hazardstatement>
   </body>
</topic>
