<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="id12e4c2b3-d41d-40ca-978d-37a86f74c206">
   <title>Performance Optimization </title>
   <body>
      <p>
         <indexterm>Performance Optimization</indexterm>When processing larger amounts of data, there are several options. Either
you rely on the performance optimization implemented in the XSLT / XQuery
processor, or use methods such as <xref format="dita" scope="local" type="concept"
               href="4_1_3_XSLT_Streaming.dita">XSLT Streaming</xref> -
or you go one level lower and see what Java is doing.</p>
      <p>It is of course also possible to restructure your algorithms, optimize
the code, and make everything (even more) cryptic. But following the
motto <i>"Never change a running system"</i>, in many places the foundation is
fine-tuned first.</p>
      <section>
         <title>Heap Memory and Garbage Collector</title>
         <p>
            <indexterm>Performance Optimization<indexterm>Heap Memory and Garbage Collector</indexterm>
            </indexterm>If I recall correctly from my computer science studies, a
garbage collector automatically collects memory blocks that the Java program (Saxon) no
longer needs and hands them over to the heap memory management. A heap
is usually an automatically balancing tree that manages the freed 
memory blocks sorted by size.</p>
         <p>Since the garbage collector also runs at the same time as our Java program,
the two can get in each other's way. If you have reserved too much
heap space for the Java program, then the garbage collector swaps its 
temporary products to a slow swap area. If you have 
reserved too little, there is not enough space for the main program.</p>
         <p>Common error messages are, for example:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <p>
                  <codeph>java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: Java heap space</codeph>
               </p>
            </li>
            <li>
               <p>
                  <codeph>java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: GC Overhead limit exceeded</codeph>
               </p>
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>More information on this can be found on the Oracle website on the topic <xref format="html" scope="external"
                  href="https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/troubleshoot/memleaks002.html">Oracle documentation page on memory error messages</xref>
         </p>
         <p>These much-discussed heap settings of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) have a particularly significant impact 
on applications where memory consumption at a given
time is not predictable, e.g. a Java game with action and occasionally role-playing elements.</p>
         <p>In this case, tuning the JVM heap options would be appropriate, especially since you also want to optimize the game for
players who do not have access to the most powerful hardware.</p>
         <p>Common options that are passed with the Java call are, for example:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <p>
                  <codeph>Xms&lt;size&gt; set initial Java heap size</codeph>
               </p>
            </li>
            <li>
               <p>
                  <codeph>Xmx&lt;size&gt; set maximum Java heap size</codeph>
               </p>
            </li>
            <li>
               <p>
                  <codeph>Xss&lt;size&gt; set java thread stack size</codeph>
               </p>
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>More information on this can be found on the Oracle website on the topic <xref format="html" scope="external"
                  href="https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/gc-tuning-5-138395.html">Oracle documentation page on heap memory settings and garbage collector</xref>
         </p>
         <p>For the batch-oriented processes in XML processing, these options are usually not decisive, 
since the heap is loaded linearly during the transformation of a larger document. In fact, it is even recommended to
set the upper limit for heap memory equal to the lower bound, in order to spare the JVM the selection of the appropriate memory area
at runtime.</p>
         <p>I use a 10 GB heap limit for my performance-intensive transformations:</p>
         <p>
            <codeph>-Xms10g -Xmx10g</codeph>
         </p>
         <p>This allows even very large XML files to be processed efficiently with a pipeline such as MorganaXProc <xref format="html" scope="external" href="https://www.xml-project.com/morganaxproc/">MorganaXProc</xref>
            <indexterm>Tools<indexterm>MorganaXProc</indexterm>
            </indexterm>,
which keeps the result documents of individual transformation steps in memory.</p>
      </section>
   </body>
</topic>