<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="idc1678e74-d15c-42a1-9fd0-912fced210ef">
   <title> </title>
   <body>
      <dl status="changed">
         <dlhead>
            <dthd>Term</dthd>
            <ddhd>Description</ddhd>
         </dlhead>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Core Stylesheet</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In a stylesheet project, the core stylesheet refers to an already extensively tested variant that is overridden by a sub-stylesheet using the XSLT import precedence mechanism.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Sub-Stylesheet</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>A sub-stylesheet specializes the core stylesheet to avoid redundancy and thus ensure maintainability.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Parameterization</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In parameterization, an existing stylesheet is equipped with parameters so that the same code base can be reused for as many product variants and output formats as possible. This is intended to reduce redundancy and simplify invocation.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Topic Based Authoring</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In topic based authoring, the focus is not on the entire book, but rather the content is divided into reusable topics that can then be referenced in various publications. </p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>DITA</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>DITA is an information model for technical documentation - it supports <i>Topic Based Authoring</i>.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>SGML</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>SGML is the predecessor of XML.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>TIOBE Index</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>The TIOBE Index annually captures the popularity of programming languages.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Single Source Publishing</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In single source publishing, a variety of output formats are generated from a single XML source.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Structured Content Authoring</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In <i>Structured Content Authoring</i>, the content is semantically marked up using XML tags. In a WYSIWYG approach, most tags are only optionally visible.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>XML Databases</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>XML databases are NoSQL databases, meaning "Not only SQL" or indeed "No SQL" is supported. They specialize in XML data.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Applicabilities</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In a technical publication, text building blocks and graphics are tagged with applicabilities to identify, for example, country-specific product variants.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Translation Management</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>This refers to the management of translations of a technical publication. Since a larger publication is constantly updated, but the translations by external translation agencies take some time, a certain coordination logic is required.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Content Delivery Portal</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>The output formats generated by single source publishing are distributed in a targeted manner via web portals. Currently, experiments are being conducted with QR codes on machines that can be scanned with a smartphone to then download the documentation for the machine.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Automatic Typesetting</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In a print publication, good word, line, column, and page breaks are essential. The content marked up with XML is automatically "set" in the right place by a formatting process.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>CCMS</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>
                  <i>Component Content Management System</i> - To realize concepts like <i>Topic Based Authoring</i>, specialized content management systems are required that do not manage content on a <i>"chapter basis"</i>, but rather manage topics and the relationships between them at a fine-grained level.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Diffing</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>In <i>diffing</i>, two XML instances are compared with each other. A diffing processor marks added, deleted, and changed XML elements in a <i>diffing instance</i>.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Intelligent Cross-References</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>Links between text passages in different topics and publications remain version-faithful, meaning that in an earlier version of the publication, those chapters and texts are referenced that were current at the time of publication.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Push vs. Pull</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>Push and pull are two concepts for designing transformations with XSLT. One approach "pulls" information from the input and places it in the correct position in the output. The other transforms the input step by step into the output, cf. chapter <xref format="dita" scope="local" type="concept"
                        href="3_1_Push_vs_Pull_Stylesheets.dita">Push vs. Pull Stylesheets</xref>. Mixed forms are the norm.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
         <dlentry>
            <dt>Pre-Transformation</dt>
            <dd>
               <p>A step in the processing chain of an XSLT transformation that prepares the data for the next step, cf. chapter <xref format="dita" scope="local" type="concept"
                        href="4_1_1_Pre_Transformations.dita">Pre-Transformations</xref>.</p>
            </dd>
         </dlentry>
      </dl>
   </body>
</topic>